okay cool uh okay yep all right thanks for coming to my
talk uh my name is stefan noel and today i
'd like to talk to you about burning down data walls in
the u.
s fire service and beyond so just a bit of overview so
first a bit about ul the company behind the fire safety research
institute then what is nervous and what problems we were trying to
solve and then the fire software landscape and then some opportunities for
at proto okay i'm a senior front-end engineer at the
fire safety research institute these are just my handles and tech that
i'm interested in and you can usually find me in south
florida or a bit sometimes in costa rica or
portugal so you well you usually can you might recognize
our logos or maybe not if you squint hard enough um
on your smoke alarm your circuit breaker and if you take out
your laptop charger you'll probably find us on there as well
and the history so the history of you will coincides with
the uh the electrification of the u.
s and um basically in the ahead of the chicago world
fair um there were a lot of fires basically and um our
founder uh william henry merrill noticed that it was
due to a lack of standards and um above a firehouse
in downtown chicago ul was founded so this is just to
give you a sense of the scale of uh fire in the
u.
s there are over 30 000 fire departments and they have all
different ways to do things and around 19 000 are completely volunteer
and then around 3 000 are completely career so they get uh
salaried and then the rest are a combination of um
yeah basically salaried and and volunteers and fdny
is the largest in the u.
s and uh yeah the the scale ranges from extremely large to
extremely small sometimes it's just whoever shows up for the day
and there are 36 around 36 million calls for fire service per
year but 65 of those calls that firefighters respond to are medical
in nature so i'll just run you through the life of
a fire incident and the kind of software usually involved in that
so step one is the fire occurs you become aware of it
then you then you run then you call 9-1-1 then
you uh that that call to 9-1-1 is actually communicating
with somebody at what's called a public service answering point a
piece up is how they the acronym is and so this is
where the cad software comes in this is a computer-aided
dispatch and then they're the ones who dispatch the fire truck
their goal is to arrive there in within six minutes because when
it comes to fire every every second counts and then the firefighters
arrive on scene and then they fill out the details
about what happened on the fire report so firefighters aren't really
excited about filling out the report but that data is really useful
and we use it in order to inform our research try to
improve response times and yes it's not it's not it
's not data for profit it's for for research so that
last step uh that's what's called a record management system
an rms and before neres there was n first so
what would happen is the the fire software that they would use
would basically take whatever they entered in plain text and they would
submit it to an ftp server and then one to two
years later around the time by which which is no longer useful
at all then they can finally get that data out and a
major problem was that the data standard hadn't updated since 2014
so all of these different software providers would have they would be
stuffing data into this one field where they can put in whatever
they they wanted and basically there was no data portability because
of that so then nearest comes in and we made the schema
more flexible to try to prevent that kind of vendor locking in
addition we also provide this a free rms in order for
them to enter their data and we also provide the like essential
analytics for them out and all of this is provided uh for
free and in and it's also we provide a rest ap
i not an ftb server um we we will also be
providing nearest public which will also provide aggregate data um and get
that that will be available uh you won't need authentication in
order to get to that uh so did we solve everything was
all we needed to reverse time back to the open api
days and just have a separate entity and in charge of that
api well the fire service software needs go beyond just incident
data it includes pre-planning for how you would plan your
response to a fire access points just structure inspections for fire code
violations permit management personal management to manage the training of firefighters uh
staffing and scheduling because firefighters usually they work 48 hours in a
row and trade shifts all the time and you have to manage
your fire trucks and and fire hoses and yeah uh medication
as well so there's a lot of software that firefighters need
but the thing is they they want only one invoice one bill
at the end because request for proposal is difficult especially in the
larger fire departments so what happened is they wanted to they had
one fire software that was really good at one thing and then
these companies in order to provide what firefighters wanted became mediocre in
a lot of things they in order to implement these other features
they had to well try to implement it themselves but usually would
aggressively acquire in order to do so to become a kind of
everything app for fire and those departments who only wanted some of
the features would now have to pay for all of them and
what fire departments really wanted was just one one bill and software
that did a lot of things and this had led to one
tool to rule them all and that has led to just a
few companies ruling them all and so now about 60 percent of
the market share is owned by four companies and it's often
driven by medical reporting needs as you saw that 65 percent of
the calls are are medical in nature so this is kind of
related to what what rudy mentioned before um but people don
't want more and more apps but also the the billing experience
um it's important here as well and when it comes to
fire trucks the the situation is even even more dire and the
price hikes that resulted is is even worse and fire isn
't just the u.
s problem it's global and we want to connect to and
work with um international communities and the eu has actually uh recently
started a fire stat and canada has uh also expressed interest
in something similar of a reporting at a national level and yet
to understand the fire problem we would we will need global standards
and what if we can go beyond incidents and also include all
the data from fire all the different fire software that that firefighters
use i think at proto has a lot of potential here and
if if you have ideas on on how to push safety science
fire fire science and safety science forward um we we are open
to collaboration so if if you would like to get started on
on in fire software one one way would be to integrate with
uh neris um this top link here is it's the
link that will show you all the steps you create some geo
tickets and we'll set you up with a dedicated department and
this below the link below is the the link to our ap
i docs and just some final thoughts the transition to now has
just happened january of this year and the moat is
lower than ever we're seeing two-person startups making real head
way and word of mouth spreads fast in the fire service and
i would love to see at proto enter this this space as
well you don't need fire knowledge to build um or nearest
uh the second uh just the open question again um interop
gives us a lot more user choice but can we have um
a better billing experience as well um and then finally um the
the fire space who would have thought it's it would be
uh dominated by by for pc funded companies as well and you
've you've heard it before uh products drive protocols and i
'd love to see us drive at proto forward with fire software
thank you that that was great
so you you actually uh you pitched civic tech global standards and
then you snuck in um an app proto wallet in the
side of things as well did i hear that yeah you did
that was amazing yeah thank you very much you